welcome everyone my name is Alec Cano
jeah I'm a psychiatrist who practices in
Boston Massachusetts thank you all for
coming to the hell the first of its kind
healthy gamer lecture series and for
those of you who are joining us from the
internet welcome as well a couple of
things just kind of in terms of
housekeeping so in 2018 we're gonna try
to do a couple more workshops or
seminars in the Boston area and
depending on how much interest or
traction we get we may try to do
something in New York City for those of
you who are kind of interested in
working longitudinally or continuing
after this we do have a couple of online
options you know there are there is a
mailing list we have a couple of discord
group chats where people can kind of
work through stuff together those have
been going really well and then we're
gonna continue to make other kinds of
content so there may be down below in
the comment section you guys should see
like you guys can follow me on Twitter
and there will be a couple of different
email addresses that you guys can sign
up for if you're interested in workshops
if you're interested in more online
content if you're interested in any of
the online groups you can get connected
to everything down there so if you guys
have any questions about any of that you
know ask me or one of the other staffers
after we're done
so just to let you guys know a little
bit about why I call this kind of the
healthy gaming lecture series a few
years ago when I was training I got kind
of curious about video game addiction
and the more people that I talk to the
more I realized that like the
psychiatric community doesn't actually
know much about video game addiction and
I realized that the reason for that is
because most people who are kind of at
the forefront the leaders of thought
within the field of psychiatry and
psychology are like experts right so
they're like people in their 50s and 60s
if you look at people who are like
Chiefs of Psychiatry so for example I
trained at this place called
Massachusetts General Hospital in
another place called McLean Hospital and
the chief of psychiatry at MGH is this
guy named Jerry Rosenbaum he's off he's
an awesome guy but he's like he's like
older and I don't know if he's ever
really played
video games so all of the people who are
kind of leading the field of psychiatry
if you look at people like the president
of the American Psychiatric Association
all of those people are like older and
they haven't really had experience
playing video games and so they don't
actually know what it's like to play
video games and they really struggle to
help people who struggle with video game
addiction
so when I started to do is I got kind of
curious about it and I realized that
actually none of my mentors are leaders
in the field could actually tell me much
about it because they didn't know much
about it so what I started to do is just
started working with gamers so I just
talked to people on my started out with
like kind of my Steam friends list and
then over time as I started talking to
more and more people I started getting
emails and people that I talked to were
like hey maybe you should talk to this
guy and word of mouth kind of spread and
I ended up working with over the last
three years
you know maybe 50 or 60 gamers and spent
hundreds of hours working with these
people and then even recently started to
get requests to work with some
professional video game players in terms
of like stress management and things
like that and so I just started working
with people and trying to figure out
like you know why is it that you guys
play video games and and what can we do
to help you with your addiction one of
the first things that I realized when I
was working with these people is that I
don't think addiction is really a great
term you know I think this is part of
the problem with the field of Psychiatry
is we try to take things that we know
like drug addiction and alcohol
addiction and we try to apply it to new
phenomenon like video game addiction and
so we call we sort of all lump those
things together but in my mind there's a
huge difference between someone who's an
alcoholic and someone who's addicted to
video games I mean I myself almost
failed out of college due to playing way
too much way too many video games when I
was like in a freshman and sophomore and
so I was kind of there and I still feel
like I haven't changed it's not like my
addiction got cured it's just my help my
gaming used to be what I like to call
problematic and now it's become
healthier so it used to really interfere
with the goals that I had for myself
and interfere with my life like I was
like I remember sleeping through my
Spanish final freshman year because I
was playing Diablo 3 or Diablo 2 until
like 4:00 in the morning and I remember
like my alarm going off at 7:30 that I
have a final in an hour and I just like
turned off my alarm and went back to
sleep and then like failed Spanish
because I just [ __ ] slept through the
final that is a problem right that's
when your gaming is a problem and now
you know I still play games I still
enjoy playing games I'd love to play
more games but I'm too busy doing this
[ __ ] with you guys instead of actually
playing games but that's ok I'm ok with
that
because I feel like this is something
that I find meaningful and fulfilling
and so games have become kind of more of
a recreation for me and that's what I'd
like to help what I'd like to help you
guys do so it's not about whether you're
a video game addict or not and we will
talk a little bit about you know how do
you decide if your gaming is a problem
how do you decide if you're an addict
but what I really like to do today is
help you guys learn how to be a healthy
gamer and this is another thing so in
the addiction world you know there's
this idea that it's abstinence only if
you're an alcoholic it's like you know
10 years sober and you're never allowed
to have a single drink my understanding
is that video game addiction is
different because there are a lot of
people I've worked with who used to have
really problematic gaming who still
enjoy playing games for they're doing
fine in life now one of the people that
I work with is he's actually a really
successful entrepreneur makes like seven
figures a year and still plays like
video games for like 30 hours a week and
I think he's okay with that and I think
that's fine too if you're doing
everything that you want to do and and
you want to play video games for 30
hours a week that's fine go for it
so today what I'd like to do is kind of
just start by reframing a little bit so
the first thing is that you know it's
not about whether you're an addict or
not I think where we need to start is to
help you guys understand why you play
video games in the first place and what
function video games serve for you and
then we also need to think about how do
video games shape you how do they change
your brain how do they affect your neuro
chemistry how do they affect your
ability to form relationships and your
ability to solve problems because they
definitely do when a human brain does
something for
hours a day pretty much every day of the
week that whatever whatever activity
they do is gonna change their brain if
you think about someone who plays music
for four hours a day that's gonna change
the way their brain works it's gonna
change the way that their auditory
cortex develops and in that same way
gaming shapes you guys so the goals of
these lectures are not necessarily to
overcome your addiction but to gain
understanding about yourself and
understanding about how the gaming that
you do shapes the person that you are
and so today we're gonna cover a couple
of different topics so we're gonna talk
about some just general things about
sort of introduction to gaming and how
you know whether it's a problem or how
you know whether it's an addiction we're
gonna talk about some things involving
cognition so how does gaming change the
way that you think and change the way
that you approach problems we're gonna
talk a little bit about neuroscience
because one of the things that I found
is that gamers are actually really good
at dealing with complicated information
and one of the reason that I love
working with you guys is I can actually
talk about technical neuroscience and it
bizarrely does not go over your heads
you guys are actually able to assimilate
and use that information in a way that
very few of my patients are so we're
going to talk about neuroscience we're
gonna talk about cognition we're gonna
talk about some general principles we're
also going to talk about relationships
so we'll talk a little bit about how you
form relationships and games how that
works how gaming interferes with
relationships and we're also going to
talk a little bit about emotions I'm
gonna sneeze okay and so my hope is that
by helping you guys understand a little
bit about who you are and how you work
how your emotions work how your
cognition works how you form
relationships what's happening in your
brain my hope is to equip you or empower
you with this information so that you
can get understanding around your gaming
and by gaining understanding eventually
get control over this person that you
are and by getting control over yourself
my hope is that you can move in the
direction that you want to and stop
being a problematic gamer and start
being a healthy gamer
you